---
layout: post
title: "Inspiration for a Dataflow Language"
comments: true
---

## Inspiration

A few years ago I was starting a project to create a data-logging and control system for my motorcycles. I didn't have a single specific purpose in mind; I wanted a flexible system that would help a rider understand and control his machine and his riding. This project was an outgrowth of both my passion and my profession; therefore, I had high standards by which I would judge my own work. I wanted a system that would be configurable/programmable in an elegant way appropriate to the types of applications for which it would be used.

A few characteristics of these types of systems are:

- Multiple sensors provide data in parallel
- Most sensor data is sampled at a constant rate
- These systems run indefinitely, constantly sensing and reacting to their environments

I wanted a programming language suited to describing this type of *real-time* *reactive* systems in a concise way. I also wanted to avoid having to write procedural code, as this to me is only suited to batch processing systems.

## Goals

A few goals of the language were:

- Simple, Expressive, Beautiful
- No Boiler-Plate Code
- Predictable Run-Time Behavior and Timing
- Platform Independence
- Modularity and Composability

Some additional "nice to haves":

- Automatically Parallelizable
- An Isomorphic Visual Representation

In general I wanted to build something that could be used for a simple system with a few sensors, or scale up to a high-speed *signal-processing* system.

## A Note on Surface Syntax

I spent a little time thinking about surface syntax before I stopped worrying and learned to love [lisp][lisp] [s-expressions][sexpr]. This fit both my technical needs and personal aesthetic preferences perfectly. While this may not suit everybody, this has been one design decision that I have never looked back on.

## Result

After some work I ended up designing a [*synchronous*][synch] [*dataflow*][dataflow] language. A program in this language is effectively a set of equations expressing the value of discrete-time output signals in terms of discrete-time input signals.

Here is what it looks like:

{% highlight clojure %}
{% include abc.rcr %}
{% endhighlight %}

This program will consume two input signals `a` and `b` and produce an exported signal `c` which will be sum at each point in time of the input signals `a` and `b`.

The dataflow program itself is side-effect free. Any interaction between the dataflow program and the world happens through imports and exports. There are various ways that this dataflow language could be embedded within a larger system, but the idea is to make the system configurable/programmable much in the way [Lua][lua] has been used by game programmers to make their games and game engines configurable/programmable to various degrees.

And now for a slightly more interesting example:

{% highlight clojure %}
{% include acceleration.rcr %}
{% endhighlight %}

Here we compute `acceleration` from `speed` by looking at the difference between the current speed and the speed at the previous time-step divided by the time-step. We also do some unit conversion so that everything comes out right. The `pre` operator used here is a keyword that references the previous value of a signal and is part of the magic automatically handled by the system.

Here is the above program at work on some sample data from my truck:

{% highlight python %}
{% include acceleration.txt %}
{% endhighlight %}

So far I have been very pleased with the results. It is a fun language to develop these types of systems in. I'm not sure if anyone else has any interest in a language like this. If so, let me know.

[lisp]:     https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lisp
[sexpr]:    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S-expression
[defmacro]: http://www.defmacro.org/ramblings/lisp.html
[synch]:    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Synchronous_programming_language
[dataflow]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dataflow_programming
[lua]:      http://www.lua.org

